>> Many people who have
psychedelic experiences,
near-death experiences,
and mystical or out of body
experiences often report that
sound was a key in the journey.
Can the power of sound be
connected with the ability
to travel between different
worlds and dimensions
as ancient cultures
once believed?
>> The music, the
auditory sound,
and the psychedelic experience
are very closely related.
In February of 2018,
the publication PsyPost
reported on a new
brain study that
had been released only
two months earlier.
Dr. Selen Atasoy, computational
neuroscientist at Pompeu Fabra
University, explored how
the brain communicates
through harmonic vibrations.
Using a new math-based
method called
connectome-harmonic
decomposition,
her team was able to
analyze brain activity
and observe how LSD
affected consciousness.
With plant medicine
and sound, is it
possible to reliably
affect our brains
into harmonics or songs
that loosen our attachment
to consensus reality?
One could argue that there's
no form of expression
as impactful and far reaching
as the ancient art of music.
It is found within nearly every
culture on every continent.
It conjures memories
and emotions.
It forms bonds, connecting
people and communities.
It moves us.
We're a highly visual species,
but the ability to hear sound
is one of our core senses.
It is one of the primary
ways our brain makes sense
of the world around us, picking
up cues or frequencies even
on a subconscious level.
Sound and frequency are
fundamental to our perception
of reality, but
also the building
blocks of reality itself.
>> Frequency is a
vibrational state.
It's measured using
hertz, cycles per second.
The music can affect reality
in a very specific way.
We experience it in
a hearing threshold,
which is between 20
hertz and 20 kilohertz.
It affects us in a
very particular state.
And when we're subjected to it,
it does specific change in us
whether on the energetic,
physical, mental, emotional,
and spiritual level.
So there is a form
of entrainment.
>> Entrainment occurs
when music affects us.
It can be as simple as tapping
your foot or dancing to a beat.
>> This is how acoustics, the
part of physics that deals with
sound and vibration,
creates reality.
Our consciousness
is being affected
by something outside of us and
actually, just about anything
that our consciousness
is exposed to.
That's why entrainment is
huge in creating reality.
>> The human brain is often
described as a computer.
But to better
understand how it works,
Dr. Selen Atasoy
argues that it's
more like a
multi-scale resonance
system or an orchestra.
It's almost as if the
brain is playing music.
>> Dr. Selen Atasoy found
that the brain has certain
harmonics.
And these are in
multiples of nine.
And that created a predictable
state of consciousness.
Some of them greatly
expanded states.
>> Modern science refers to
the sections of our brain
responsible for generating our
sense of self as the default
mode network.
It's where memories
are created and where
we construct mental models
or simulated realities.
But the default mode
network can operate almost
like a program or a song
that runs in the brain,
hindering open-mindedness.
The human brain appears
to consistently fluctuate
through harmonic frequencies.
However, Dr. Atasoy observed
that the brains of those on LSD
displayed more complex brain
harmonics, which are associated
with higher level cognition.
>> Dr. Atasoy's research on
studying people's brains who
are on LSD, well, first of
all, when people take LSD,
the brain is lit
with activities.
All the different parts
of each hemisphere
are interacting with
each other, communicating
in both hemispheres, are
creating a state of coherence.
>> The research on brain
connectome-harmonics is
fascinating because it's using
fMRI and imagery over time
to map the brain in terms of
harmonics like music and then
allows us to deconstruct what's
happening in the brain down
to the musical notes.
So we're able to see the
brain in terms of resonance,
how it's affected by
outside input, what's
happening in its own
resonant organization within,
and how it responds to context.
>> Musical instruments
naturally resonate at certain
frequencies, changing only when
a musician manipulates a fret,
key, or reed.
Is it possible that
the human brain
works in a similar fashion?
Atasoy and her
research team concluded
that internal and
external stimuli,
such as psychedelics and music,
altered harmonic brain states.
And these changes
incited the brain
to reorganize its activity as
if to tune itself to resonate
with these altered frequencies.
Each brain signature
or song correlates
to a particular state
of consciousness.
Dr. Atasoy's method predicts
states of consciousness
based on brain
frequency patterns.
For instance, the 9th, 18th,
and 27th harmonics in the brain
are the signatures for
deep sleep and loss
of consciousness.
There is a
mathematical framework
central to the theories of
heat, light, sound, gravity,
magnetism, and even
fluid dynamics.
It can predict animal
patterns, the morphology
of biological systems,
heat diffusion,
electromagnetic behavior,
and quantum mechanics.
It's as if there is
a predictable pattern
inherent in the cosmos,
a kind of harmonic code.
In humans, the more
complex the harmonic song
is, the greater access the
individual has to their brain's
higher potential.
Dr. Atasoy found
psychedelics reliably
give human beings more access.
Why does a psychedelic
compound like LSD
bring consciousness to a
more sophisticated level
of brain harmonics?
>> When people take LSD,
both hemispheres are creating
a state of coherence.
And naturally,
when that happens,
then the effect of sound and
music would be far greater.
Cymatics in the way the brain
is being exposed to the harmony.
But also we need to be careful
with what kind of harmony
are we using here, an
equal tempered harmony
or a nonequal temperament.
Equal temperament
is a system that we
created that quantized the 12
half steps in the octave, which
means we're no longer following
the blueprint of sound
that nature gave us.
>> Ethnomusicologists like
Tannous believe that humans are
attracted to creating
instruments like singing bowls,
gongs, bells, rattles,
instruments that create
a buzzing sound.
Why?
To connect with the
harmonies of nature.
Harmonic vibrations are
several compatible vibrations
playing at once.
>> And this is where the
body is recalibrating itself,
reinstating the state of
harmony within the self affected
by the sympathetic resonance of
music with nonequal temperament
impacting the brain and
the connective harmonic.
There's so much to learn
about music and sound.
It's so exciting but also
frightening of the enormity
of how much we still don't know.
>> Imagine walking alone
along a forest trail,
isolated from the noise
pollution of the city.
Silence.
But as you go further,
you begin to register
the symphony of
sounds around you,
the rustle of leaves in
the wind, the birdsongs,
and the chattering squirrels.
Nature constantly
generates its own music.
>> The sounds of nature are
so integral to our healing
experience on a day to day basis
and so much more so in moments
of ceremony.
We regulate to those sounds.
Our nervous systems, especially
our parasympathetic nervous
systems, are in
balance when we are
in the presence of all the
different sounds of nature.
>> Nowhere is this more
evident than in the Amazonian
rainforest where Ayahuasca
traditions were developed long
ago.
It should come as no surprise
that jungle noises have always
been an integral part of
the traditional ceremonies.
>> So I find that jungle noises
are impactful if there are
jungle noises if you're
in that environment.
This is an aspect of bringing
the background forward.
Your hearing seems quite acute.
Your hearing seems much
more acute than normal.
So you're aware of
these background noises
very much in that
jungle setting.
>> Also playing a role in these
ceremonies is the human voice.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
>> The song being sung by these
shamans is called an icaro.
These are traditional
songs and chants
used in healing ceremonies.
They originate with
the indigenous tribes
in the Amazon.
It is believed that they
are direct connection
with the spirits of ancestors,
plants, and animals.
In conjunction with
plant medicine,
this can facilitate healing
and open new realms of reality.
These icaros create a unique
resonance within the song
and within those who are
simply listening to it.
>> In the Ayahuasca setting,
the singing of icaros,
the magical songs if you
will, that's also a big part
of the setting component,
because to set up these
resonances is, I think, very
important to the way that we
process the information.
For example, everyone who
has taken Ayahuasca probably
understands that the icaros,
or whatever oral stimulation
you have in the experience,
drives the hallucinations.
It can trigger synesthesia.
And shamans become
very adept at directing
the experience for the entire
group through the icaros.
So the importance of
the sonic environment,
the auditory
environment, can't really
be underemphasized at all.
It's very important.
>> So then there's the
synergy of the two.
There's something about
ingesting the substance.
There's a pharmacology to that.
And yes, that's a
real material thing.
But there's also the
person's direct experience
of the Ayahuasca.
Somebody who's very
familiar with the culture,
familiar with the energetics
and open that way,
maybe they can get all
the same from the song.
But somebody who's
totally close,
they don't believe in anything,
then you give them Ayahuasca
and then they hear the song.
It's a lot different.
>> To be able to receive
those songs requires being
in a receptive place and being
in a sacred feminine energy,
which doesn't have to do
with being a man, or a woman,
or any gender, but simply
being in that place of yin,
of receiving, that we all
need so badly to bring back
into balance within each
of us and within the world.
>> For some adepts and shamans,
the icaro is an interactive
tool capable of receiving
and sending information.
>> My particular tradition,
Shipibo tradition,
the icaro is what we use to
look and see with the person.
So I'm trying to have visions
about what's wrong with them.
And the song will help that
open up for me, the song I sing.
And I can see more when I sing.
Something like echolocation,
or sonar, or whatever,
it's like, I'm pinging
out to the world.
And then I'm interacting
with something over there.
>> Of course, one doesn't need
to participate in one of these
ceremonies to experience the
psychadelic potential created
by the frequencies
of the human voice.
One third of the somatosensory
cortex area of the brain
is fully devoted to
the oral cavity--
tongue, lips, and speech.
By speaking,
singing, or chanting,
can we further stimulate
these areas of the brain?
>> Using the voice is very
important whether through
singing, vocalization, or
toning because of what it does
to the body.
When we sing, when we talk,
we experience our voice
in two different ways,
the auditory aspect,
which comes out of
the mouth and bounces
on the walls and ceilings,
and comes back to our ear.
The second one is through
bone and tissue conduction.
And that's the reason
why when people
hear their voice on the
recording for the first time,
they say, oh, this
doesn't sound like me.
No.
That's you through the
auditory sense alone.
And that's how people hear you.
And you hear your voice through
bone and tissue conduction
40% to 50%.
So when we are toning and
moaning with lips closed,
we're focusing on the
vibrational aspect traveling
through the lips, the
jaws, the cheeks, the head.
When we're vocalizing,
there is some sort of that.
It's not as great as the
toning, but that causes
several things to happen.
The entire body
is being vibrated.
So there's a frequency
that is affecting
the water in our
body, the liquid,
and enhancing the
cymatics effect,
and changing the neurochemistry,
affecting the vagus nerve that
starts at the brainstem
and goes through our neck.
And this, the neck
area is probably
the best area to get the
closest to the vagus nerve.
>> There's a phenomenon
called cymatics,
which is where you
have a metal plate,
and you put some powder on it,
and then you hold a tuning fork
or expose it to an
auditory signal.
And you'll see how it
organizes itself into patterns.
Well, the same thing is
going on in your body.
These resonances have
that organizing effect.
>> The vagus nerve extends
through the throat,
between the lungs, and
attaches to every major organ.
Stimulating it sends a
relaxation message to the body.
>> So when we
vocalize and we tone,
we are causing some
sort of massaging.
Also, diaphragmatic
breathwork-- belly breathing,
what people call--
is some sort of massage
to the vagus nerve that
goes through the diaphragm
that relaxes the body.
[HUMMING LOW TONE]
So this is very
important to enhance
the psychedelic experience,
to bring the awareness inward.
>> Holotropic
breathwork pioneer Dr.
Stanislav Grof has used music
and breath work within his
sessions with profound
results that seem to mimic
a psychedelic experience.
>> We have many people who
have done psychedelics coming
to holotropic
breathwork sessions.
And I do, before the
sessions, relaxation
before they start
breathing faster.
And there are
always a few people
who start going before we
even tell them to breathe
because they have
been holding it down,
sometimes for months or years.
And so we started
experimenting just
with music and the breathing.
And we found out that the
breathing itself with the music
would take people to
very similar places.
People are reliving birth,
having prenatal experiences,
past life experiences,
archetypal experiences.
And I became very
fascinated by how much you
can do with such simple means.
I always thought
about psychedelics
as these exotic substances.
>> Since the brain generates
harmonic signatures,
what effect could the
proliferation of frequency
disruptors like Wi-Fi
have on the world?
>> Radio fans are all earphones,
listening to a pioneer station
WH--
>> If history has taught us
anything about technology,
it's that humans are quick
to expand the new one's reach
before fully understanding
how it will impact society.
>> First British wireless
station to receive American
voice.
>> 5G, a new
generation of Wi-Fi,
has begun rolling
out across the world.
China and South Korea
have already adopted it
in major cities, and
the global rollout
is moving even faster than
most experts predicted.
But could this wave
of new technology
be disruptive to the natural
evolution of consciousness
to higher and more
sophisticated harmonic patterns?
Concerns over the
disruptive effects
of technology-based frequencies
date back over 100 years.
>> As far back as 1917,
Rudolf Steiner said that
electromagnetic frequencies
were making it harder for people
to connect to the
spiritual realms.
But he did not say that
we should avoid or reject
the technology.
He said we need to illuminate
the dragon from within.
What this implies is that
these frequencies are
meant to be worked
with and transmuted
and that they have
a purpose, but we
have to turn them
into something that
is at least non-harmful or
maybe even beneficial to humans.
At this time, they
seem to be accelerating
some of the crisis we
face on the planet.
So this might indicate
that sometimes we
need a kind of crisis to
accelerate a spiritual
or an evolutionary leap.
And that is what
seems to be happening.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Can mankind,
using technology,
harness the power of frequencies
to create something more
therapeutic?
The therapeutic
properties of music
have been widely
accepted for many years.
When used in conjunction
with medicinal plants,
could more potential
be unlocked?
>> We know that the experience
of listening to certain musical
tracks, certain frequencies,
can help us to expand
our consciousness and
reach mystical states.
We also know that plant
medicines can do this, as well.
And when, in the
right combination,
these are used
together, they can
be like the golden
key that opens up
the gateway of our consciousness
to the higher worlds.
>> I feel like when you work
with these psychoactive plants,
the music really
helps you to relax.
It helps you to
let go of the mind.
And it really helps
you to start to lose
your presence of the body.
And so what that does
is that carries you off
into those other realms.
So it really assists in kind of
being the river that you travel
on into the spirit realm.
>> Is there a difference between
prerecorded music and music
played live during a ceremony?
>> Prerecorded music sometimes
has its own intelligence,
and that can be a profoundly
healing experience.
And I also think there's
something profound
about an artist
or musician who's
in the frequency
of the medicine.
Usually, the
musicians in ceremony
have taken a small
amount of medicine
so that they're tapped in.
And they're playing
that music that
is really connected to the
group and what the group needs.
So I do feel that that has
some incredible power to it,
but it doesn't necessarily mean
that recorded music doesn't
have that potential.
>> The sounds of
nature align us, also,
to the cycles of nature--
day and night, monthly,
and even to the seasons,
whereas man-made sounds are
always going, going, going,
going, and do not connect us
to that deep, ancient part
of ourselves.
>> You may have experienced
being at a concert,
and the music is so loud it
comes up through your body.
You can feel it taking over
your natural biorhythms.
And when music is
really fast and it
has a beat that's
faster than your heart,
that can promote
feelings of anxiety.
So I like the idea
of using music
that is harmonious
with the human body
to keep us in a calm state.
>> Through listening to music,
I'm able to mentally take
myself to a place where I never
thought that I could without
being on drugs.
And that's the power of music.
That's something
that I discovered
doing a sound therapy.
And I'm just like,
man, I'm really
having almost like a psychedelic
experience with just sound.
And when I did the ayahuasca
here in the icaros,
that in itself was enough to
make me go into a trip alone.
>> The role of music in
psychedelic experience
and shamans is something to
be taken extremely seriously.
And especially with
this current interest
in Western science and Western
medical system and using these
compounds to help humans
to heal from debilitating
mental, emotional disorders
and diseases because they're
a state of going out of tune.
And we've also
seen how much music
can be a rehabilitative force.
Take, for example,
music therapy.
>> Perhaps inspired by
this kind of research,
some engineers are hopeful
that psychedelic states
of consciousness could
actually be induced using
frequency-emitting technology.
If it is possible to
synthesize or replicate
consciousness-expanding
frequencies,
could we also retrofit modern
communication technologies
to emit beneficial, or at
least neutral, frequencies?
>> In our modern era, we've
really gotten away from
the sound frequencies in music
and how those sound frequencies
could be used for healing.
In ancient Egypt,
there were temples
dedicated to sound
and sound therapy.
>> So when we observe
the monuments,
the archaeological sites,
that the Mayans, the Aztecs,
the Incas, the
ancient Egyptians,
and many other
civilizations left us,
we realize that these are
buildings that we still now
cannot reproduce them when
it comes to the mathematical
constants that they involve,
to the effect of music that we
experience in the space.
That means they were
built with sound in mind.
>> Could psychedelics be
ancient chemical factories that
stimulate our higher
chakras when consumed?
Can they help our minds
open to new realities
that were previously hidden?
>> Plant medicines-- sometimes
combinations of different
plants--
seem to have an effect
on the human energy
field and the endocrine
system in the human body,
similar to the
alchemists as they
looked at the alembic
of the human body
and the transmutation
of the lead into gold.
This could be seen
as another experience
of a psychedelic awakening
where the right combination
and intention and
container of the use
of these sacred
sacramentals can help
to open up the chakras, which
are our endocrine glands,
and stimulate certain
secretions that
help to facilitate higher
and expanded states
of consciousness.
>> Art indicates and addresses
the invisible realms of our own
hearts that people can't
see, but then they hear it,
or what we experience or the
story of our life or the story
of our ancestors.
And we hear it in the
song, and it touches us.
And we learn and we
grow and we emote.
So I think music
is a sacred thing.
>> It is my hope that,
at this time in history,
we can remember the power of
music and frequency and these
plant medicines and
the synergy of these.
They can be like the golden
key that unlocks the gateway
to higher consciousness.
[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In the next episode, our
exploration into the medicinal
relationships humans have with
nature takes another step as we
transition from plants to some
of the lesser-known creatures
shamanic groups have used
to heal the body and mind.
[RATTLING]
[WHOOSH]